so let's talk about blear or Beetle juu
the Giant star in
Orion here's a picture that I took of
the uh constellation of Orion perhaps my
favorite constellation of all and you
can see bleers glowing red at the top
there uh you've got the blue stars of
Riel at the bottom and Orion's Belt and
the other two corners you can also see
the Orion Nebula there so quite nice
little
photograph so battle jur Beetle Juice
it's a red super giant star and I use
the term super giant very precisely here
the temperature bit cooler than the sun
3,800 on the outer Photosphere the
surface of the star giving it that
cherry red color the sun is 2,000 de
hotter and a a yellowy white
star now when we get into the other
facts about bleers we find that there's
a little bit of variability here in
terms of our state of knowledge the
estimates of the mass if you go look it
up you'll find that it's anything from
14 to 19 times the Sun's mass that's a
difference of five which is sort of well
about a third of the the mass really so
um that's a big difference and based on
that difference in Mass we also don't
know the power output the true
Luminosity it could be anything from 67
to 87 times as much heat and light
coming out of the
star we also don't know very well how
fast it rotates somewhere between 30 and
40 years for it to spin on its axis
that's quite a big
change now one of the problems is it
does vary it is a slightly variable star
Chang ing from being magnitude zero very
bright indeed dimming down to about
magnitude 2 um and that's about a factor
of six difference in the actual apparent
brightness so it's classified as Alpha
orionis the brightest star in the
constellation of Orion but most of the
time Riel actually outshines
it but then in 2019 what really
attracted everybody's attention was that
it started dropping its magnitude
getting much dimmer and we'll talk about
that in the presentation as we go
through so here's bleers Beetle Juice
top leftand Corner star of Aion there
and it is massive um this is an actual
image of the star and you can see that
it is nearly uh the size of Jupiter's
orbit um by comparison with the little
diagram that we have there if we compare
it with other stars um then it's truly
huge way bigger than antari Riel
alaron something between 650 and 750
times the diameter of our sun a real
monster so large that if you put it
where the sun is the sun would be right
in the center of the solar system and
the Earth's orbit would be long on it
would be way out and its outer reaches
would be in fact in partly uh going
through the asteroid belt maybe even out
as far as Jupiter truly enormous uh so
it's good job that we don't have star
like that in the middle of our solar
system because the Earth would be
toast now it's also hurtling across
space it seems to be moving very rapidly
indeed traveling across about 30
km/s away from its point of origin which
appears to be the star cluster the Orion
ob1 Association which includes all those
bright stars of Orion's Belt alac Aly
lamb minaka uh those are all blue hot
young Bright Stars uh but bleer seems to
be ejected from that cluster and
hurtling across
space here's a better image of the star
itself it's one of the few Stars that's
large enough that we can directly image
it
and it shows some slight irregularities
we've detected evidence of huge star
spots on the surface cooler regions
large convection cells but we also see
an atmosphere around the star and that
lump on the side there is a bit of
brightening in the atmosphere so quite
irregular um and not too much of a
surprise because these very large Stars
these super Giants um are holding on to
their outer layers at that great
distance from the center of mass
relatively
weakly now when we say super giant we
really mean these Stars right in that
top grouping in the Herz sprung Russell
diagram you can see bleers is the
extreme top right hand corner there cool
outer layers giving it the red color but
a mass somewhere up in the very very top
region where the most massive stars
exist
now such stars are actually pretty rare
Nature has a much easier time getting
the material together to make small
Stars than it does big ones you have to
collapse the material and keep on
collapsing it but once it gets dense
enough in the center to trigger nuclear
fusion the heat
created switches on the star and the
radiation pushes away any more in
Falling material so unless you can
collapse a lot of material very very
rapidly it you don't really end up with
a large star it will self-limit so we
get a lot of the small stars and only a
very few of these really massive stars
we also observe few not only because
they're rare but because they don't hang
around for long they live rather short
lives we'll see more about that as we go
through the Pres presentation so uh if
they even if they were formed they're
not there for long enough for us just
taking our snapshot view of the solar uh
environment and the stars in our galaxy
to really see very
many but the definition of a super giant
isn't just an even larger star than a
giant it's actually rather Technical and
it relates to the spectrum of the star
we spread the light out into its
component colors and been done for
bleers here and we're looking in the top
rows at some of the um infrared bands
there but you can see the dark lines
carving across the Spectrum where
absorption is being carried out by
material in the outer regions of the
star and the crucial fact with super
Giants is that
these bands these lines in the Spectrum
are really quite narrow there are awful
lot of them and they're very narrow this
gives us a great chance to be able to
identify them accurately and work out
what the uh elements and molecules in
the star and the star's atmosphere
really are made of and it's because the
surface gravity at the edge of these
huge stars is really very weak so the uh
churning processes and the difference in
the movement of the B uh molecules in
the bands is quite low so you're not
getting quite as much spread from the
Doppler shift c as the material is
churning around because it's in a
relatively weak gravity environment so
it's not falling as fast as it would
otherwise be and so it goes with the
territory a super giant star regardless
of its mass really just because of its
sheer size has weak gravity at the
surface and therefore very sharp
bands now in terms of pinning down some
of these uh physical characteristics of
bleers one of the things we might like
to know is how old it is and again the
estimates of that are somewhere between
8 and 14 million
years not only is that quite young in
Cosmic terms 14 million years is not
very much at
all but there's a quite a wide margin
there you can see it's eight or 8 + 6 is
4 14 so there's a a margin of sort of
plus or minus three from the Middle
Point there out of only a dozen or so
million years and that's 25% error so
it's another of these characteristics
that we do not know very accurately and
the principal cause of our problems is
trying to pin down the
distance when we measure a distance to
the Stars the first step that we really
carry out it uses Parallax that was done
with looking at the planet Venus passing
in front of our sun to establish the
Earth Sun distance and then from there
we can use the size of the Earth's orbit
as a Baseline and look at the apparent
change in position over a six-month
period of nearby Stars against the
background of extremely distant ones and
we can pin down the distance to those
and that was done in the 1800s to begin
with and with gradually increasing
precision as instrumentation got better
and estimates in the uh early 1920s
about 100 years ago were that bleers was
180 light years
away but in the intervening 100 years
many different attempts have been made
to measure it and it's varied anything
from that figure of a relatively close
by 180 years all the way up to
1,300 light years so a big well nearly a
factor of 10 variation in the uh
estimates of course A lot of these
measurements being done from the ground
but we did have back in the late 1990s a
satellite called hip
haros which had a single job which was
to measure the distance using Parallax
using the fact that it was in orbit
above the interfering effects of the
Earth's atmosphere and that gave us a
distance to bleers of
427 light years now with that distance
and the perceived measured brightness
that we
see we can estimate how much power the
star is actually putting out it's
so-called absolute magnitude and from
that power output we can infer how
massive it must be and if you do that
you get a mass of just 7.6 times the
mass of our sun so that crucial figure
7.6 now later on the data from hip paros
10 years on was re-evaluated and they
bumped it up to 500 light years making
it a little bit more massive um it's
further away than it must be inherently
more powerful to be seen as brightly as
it is so the larger the distance
estimate the more massive we tend to
conclude the star must
be moving into this Century in 2008 the
radio telescopes of the VA in uh out
there in the desert were able to have a
go at this and they got a distance that
was 643 light years so a huge uptick in
distance and again further away means
more powerful and more massive so we
estimating it up to nearly 20 times the
mass of the Sun estimate of around
19 bringing it more up to date in 2022
physical astrophysics modeling of the
star comparing what we see in terms of
the elemental composition the size and
the other parameters that we can measure
from the Spectrum give us a much lower
number
410 so that's a much less massive star
indeed and it really makes an enormous
difference to
us now you might well ask what about the
guia mission what about the guia
spacecraft out there at orbiting in
space at the second lrange point a
million miles from Earth it's supposed
to be mapping a billion stars and
naturally that would include the star
bleers well there are really some issues
to do with actually trying to use this
because of the nature of bleers which
I'll say more about but guia has been
unable to come up with an accurate
answer so we're still really rather
guessing the distance and therefore the
power output and therefore the mass
which leaves us with one really big
question will it go bang as a supernova
it's a picture of the Crab Nebula
another supernova that blew up a
thousand years ago where a giant Star
had reached the end of its life and we
talk about the evolution of stars we
often show this diagram we show them
forming from a cloud of gas and dust and
then taking one of a couple of different
paths for small Stars they go along the
top trajectory they live a nice long
life converting hydrogen to helium as a
main sequence star a normal star as that
helium builds up in the core the
hydrogen ceases to fuse in the center
starts burning in a shell around the
core which is inert they swell up to red
giants and then puff off their outer
layers to form a planetary
nebula sometimes that's triggered when
the degenerate core in the center of the
star suddenly fuses all the helium to
carbon in a very short period of time
called a helium flash which is another
whole topic that we might cover one day
and that sudden release of energy can be
responsible for pushing the burst of uh
material away from the center of the
star giving these multiple shells of
ejection that you see here in this
picture of planetary nebula but the
point is it then goes away dissipates
into space leaving just a white dwarf uh
often made of helium and carbon and
oxygen right in the center and whether
or not it goes on to form carbon and
oxygen depends a little bit on the mass
but this top TR track that's for stars
below a crucial value of around eight
solar masses it does vary a little bit
depending on the chemical makeup of them
so for larger Stars they take the bottom
route they become Giants very quickly
they burn through their hydrogen they
form super giant STS and they are able
to go through a number of
phases burning up by further stages of
nuclear fusion until eventually they run
out of options and explode as a
supernova and then one of two things can
happen for the stars in the range 8 to
20 solar masses you will probably form a
neutron
star if it's more than 20 solo masses
then the theory goes that it will uh
collapse down immediately to a black
hole now things are a little bit more
complicated in terms of The evolutionary
stages and I just wanted to cover this
bit after you leave the main sequence
and we're showing the trajectory on the
right here that you would take across
that famous herzsprung Russell diagram
for a few different masses of stars so
if we look at the sun there in the
middle of the diagram it will
convert hydrogen to helium for a very
long period of time and then swell up
into a giant star the outer layers
expand and cool and that is because of
the uh helium build up in the center
killing nuclear fusion in the center
making the star less efficient it's only
able to fuse in a larger shell around it
the larger shell has a greater surface
area so the heat radiation from from
that fusing shell is greater in fact and
it's able to push the outer layers
outwards and it takes that trajectory up
where it says RGB Red Giant star
and if it's hot enough if it's powerful
enough it will uh form this ball of
helium in the center that becomes a
degenerate ball uh of matter held up by
rather than just simp simply by the
energy and the fusion but by uh electron
degeneracy pressure the quantum
mechanical effect and if that becomes
overwhelmed if there's enough Mass there
then suddenly the uh helium will be
fused to carbon and oxygen in a
so-called helium Flash and the star will
suddenly become much more energetic for
a short period of time as it does so and
it will whiz back across the diagram
into the yellow region becoming a yellow
giant once that then dies down and you
start forming an inert carbon oxygen
core then it will be burning helium in a
shell over the top of that and
burning uh
hydrogen in a further shell so starting
to build up that sort of onion diagram
that we sometimes see and becomes an AGB
an asymptotic giant Branch star up there
to the top right
for a five solar mass star things happen
a lot more quickly you get the hydrogen
to helium stage and then it goes across
to being a red uh small Mass red super
giant star in the low end there then
under goes that yellow loop again it
comes across when the there's a the
helium starts to burn it doesn't undergo
the helium flash process uh it's much
more of a continuous kickoff of helium
burning but it becomes more energetic
for a while turns yellow and then goes
back to being red and heads off further
up the diagram and for a 10 solar mass
star again the same sort of thing
happens there with this uh these
turnarounds and these Loops as it's
going through the phases and I've drawn
the phases of nuclear fusion at the left
there so after you've formed helium you
ram two helium nuclei together get a
brillium 8 nucleus that's highly
radioactive and will Decay back very
quickly but if you are able to hit it
with a third helium nucleus an alpha
particle in time then you can form
carbon and if you add another one then
you can get oxygen and that's uh the
start of these building of the heavier
elements I've got a whole video on the
rest of the uh process about how the
elements are formed which talks about
the the further stages and so anything
less than eight masses will not explode
as a
supernova you get this onionlike
structure with the helium and hydrogen
shells with an inert carbon oxygen core
where it's unable to carry out any more
Fusion it takes a lot more pressure and
a much higher temperature to kick off
the carbon burning process um and the
rest of the uh Fusion ladder So
eventually you will end up with a white
dwarf containing most of that core there
and the outer layers puffed off as a
planetary
nebula but if you get bigger if you're
above 10 times the mass of the Sun you
can go on and start to generate the
pressures and temperatures necessary to
kick off the furthest stages creating
elements like neon silicon and sulfur
and for a really massive star then you
can go beyond and start turning silicon
into iron and in all the uh elements up
to uh the iron number 26 in the periodic
table at least all the even numbered
ones you don't get so many of the odd
ones but you run out of options at that
point and so for the largest Stars once
that iron core starts to dominate um
it's unable to release any more energy
and collapses and you have a supernova
explosion this is a little animation of
the Crab Nebula showing the idea that
the star has exploded hurling all of its
elements that it's made back out into
space now
bleers has been observed very carefully
and in 2019 it did something very
peculia it started dimming it's always
varied up and down by one and a half to
two magnitudes but it suddenly took an
extra large dip and this got everybody
very excited that it was
possibly going to explode at any moment
and our models of Stellar Evolution
would suggest that it is coming to the
end of its life sometime soon so the
combination of that and the sudden dip
in the light curve got everybody
thinking here it's about to go now I've
been looking for it every time uh during
the winter season when we can see Orion
every Wednesday night doing our public
observing evenings and it's still there
but I do keep checking just in case
because it would be very very
spectacular it's actually in the safe
Zone it's far enough away that although
it would be very very impressive if it
blew up it um wouldn't actually be
dangerous you'd have to be uh closer
than 150 light years and we're pretty
sure it's further away than that now
it's at least 400 maybe as far as six or
even
800 so what was going on well it looks
like and this is a a combination image
of an optical image in the center and an
infrared image around it it looks like
it was in the process of puffing off
shells of
material and some of those contain
carbon and oxygen and carbon monoxide
and methane all sorts of chemicals and
the clouds of material were able to
start blocking some of the light and
that was probably what was causing it to
dim down so perhaps as it hasn't
exploded since 2019 maybe we've got a
bit longer to
wait now there have been some
observations and attempts to try to find
out if it has any companions either
secondary stars or planets and well
here's the story
1985 there was some indications from
polarization studies and a technique
called speckle interferometry so
groundbased
observations trying to rapidly capture
the dancing image created by all the
turbulence um and com recombine the
images to try to see the star in detail
and some of that suggested that there
might be a companion star but as
techniques have improved such
observations have been shown to not be
followed up so probably not um detected
back then in the
1980s in
2024 however it does look like there
might be another star either a small
star or possibly even a white dwarf star
in an orbit at 8.6 astronomical units
from the Star so uh roughly getting on
for the orbit of Saturn so not actually
swallowed up but some people have
suggested that perhaps it's only six and
that it'll get swallowed up soon and and
other uh reports are that there is a
star within a star and that some of the
pulsating and brightening and dimming
that we see and the variations in
magnitude are because there is or has
been recently swallowed into the
distended envelope of the main star a
smaller star that's still orbiting and
still intact and that's entirely
possible because the outer layers of
these super giant stars are basically a
red hot vacuum there's almost nothing
there they're so thin um in terms of the
density that another star could orbit
round inside it for a very long time um
before it would gradually spiral in the
uh resistance caused by the thin gas of
the outer layers of the star would be so
weak it would take a long time for it to
swim
inwards now if it did have some
companions we could solve our Mysteries
because when we look at uh how things
orbit around main bodies we have Kepler
laws first of all the first law that
they move in ellipses secondly that they
sweep out equal areas in equal times but
more importantly we can determine that
the square of the period is related to
the cube of the radius and in particular
it's related using a mathematical
formula based on the mass of the object
in the center it's actually 4 pi^ S over
a constant times the mass and so if we
can measure the period with which a body
is in Orbit then we can immediately
deduce how far away the radius is if we
can see it from an image with those two
numbers the the period and the distance
we can calculate the mass so we would be
be able to figure out um exactly how
massive bleers is that would then be
able to work backwards to working out
the distance so it would solve all of
our uh problems uh that compound from
the fact that we don't know either of
those two
variables but if we look back at ancient
reports uh then we find a real mystery
and I came across this in researching
the topic and that is that we see
Battlers as a red giant Tommy describes
it in Greek there as an orange tny color
well I would I would probably agree with
that I would say it is a ready orange
but it it it's more red than orange at
the moment so maybe there's something
interesting there but more significantly
Chinese reports from 300 years prior
report it as
yellow so could it be that just over
2,000 years ago 2,500 100 years ago
maybe it was actually in the Yellow
Giant stage having kicked off helium
fusion and now has returned back across
the Herz sprung Russell diagram having
passed through what we call the
instability strip and settled back down
from being a in the red giant Branch to
being in the asymptotic giant the AGB
era well that would be interesting if
that were true if we could rely on that
it might tell us that the mass is
smaller than we think and again that it
was likely to die as a planetary
nebula the other thing about knowing the
mass is it would tell us when it would
tell us when the star will come to the
end of its life there's a
formula the lifetime tow is 10 to the 10
years times the ratio of the mass of our
sun M with a little ring after it means
the mass of our sun divided by the mass
of your chosen star to the power two and
a half so in fact if you double the um
mass of a star you will reduce its
lifetime by what works out to be about a
factor of
six so the sun will live for about 10
billion years it's about halfway through
that at the moment but bigger Stars they
will live fast and die young they burn
their fuel at a prodigious rate even
though they have more of it they don't
last as long and a star that was 10
times the mass of the Sun if you plug
that into the formula you find that it's
300 times less Long lived and so that 10
billion years comes down to just 33
million really quite short but if it was
20 times the factor is 1,800 to one and
it drops to 5
million and that's that's the real Point
here that if bleers is 20 times the mass
of the sun it's only going to live for 5
million years and it's likely to blow up
tomorrow or indeed already have blown up
and the uh image of it having done so
has not quite reached us yet because of
course it's several hundred light years
away so if you take that view you might
say it might already have exploded and
the the light showing that hasn't got
here yet it really could be at that end
of things whereas if the estimate of the
mass is half that at 10 times the mass
of the Sun it would still explode as a
supernova but you might have many
millions of years left yet to wait so
fascinating to find out and as as I say
we either need to find the distance
accurately or find the mass accurately
either one of those will solve our
problem but the only other choice is to
watch and
wait so thanks very much for listening I
hope you've enjoyed that trip once
around bleers there uh the bright star
in the corner of Orion and I'll bring
their recording to a halt thanks a lot
for listening